AbstractCentral Odontogenic Fibroma (COF) is a rare tumor of odontogenic origin with a diverse histopathology found in both, the mandible and the maxilla. It can often be difficult to diagnose; therefore it is necessary to evaluate the clinical, radiographic and histopathological analyses of COF and co-relate them in a manner to make definitive diagnosis easier for the treating physician. We report and discuss the first case of Central Odontogenic Fibroma in Pakistan: a 16-year-old boy presenting as a hard bony painless swelling of the left mandibular region. It appeared as a large, well-defined unilocular radiolucency on the orthopantomogram, making it indistinguishable from other radiolucent tumors of the mandible. Histologically, the lesion in this case consisted of nests of odontogenic epithelium in between the fibroblastic stroma, confirming a definitive diagnosis of COF. It was treated by conservative surgical excision followed by curettage and no postoperative complications were reported. Introduction Central Odontogenic Fibroma (COF) is a rare and benign tumour accounting for only 0.1% of all odontogenic tumors [1-3]. It may evolve from the dental follicle, dental papilla or the periodontal membrane [4]. The lesion appears both in the maxilla and mandible; in the maxilla, it appears in the anterior region whereas in the mandible it involves the premolar and molar area [1].On clinical examination, it usually presents as a non-tender swelling showing cortical expansion [3,5-6]. However, root displacement and root resorption have also been reported in cases of more severe lesions [3]. Radiographically, the COF may be multilocular or unilocular with distinct borders although in some rare cases, a mixed radiolucent and radiopaque appearance with undefined borders has also been observed [1].Histological examination of the lesion reveals mature collagen interspersed with fibroblasts. The collagenous tissue is moderately dense to dense in most areas and nests of inactive odontogenic epithelium in strands may also be present [4].Because of its varying histological features the COF is often confused with other entities such as desmoplastic fibromas and odontogenic myxomas. Therefore it is important to correlate the clinical, radiographic and histopathological features of this tumor to reach a definitive diagnosis [1,6-8]. In this case report, we describe a case of COF in a 16 year old male occurring in the left posterior mandibular region. We also highlight the clinical and histological features of this rarely occurring odontogenic tumour.Case PresentationA 16 year old boy reported to the clinical department of Armed Forces Institute of Dentistry with a slow growing swelling on the left side of his face for the past 2 years. He had no other active complaints apart from slight discomfort upon mastication. His past medical, family and social history were considered non-contributory to the case. Upon extraoral examination, marked facial asymmetry extending from the left parasymphysis to the angle of the mandible on the left side of the face was noticed but no ulceration or change of colour of the overlying skin was observed. The submandibular lymph node of the left side was palpable (Figure 1). Figure 1: Initial presentation of the patientIntra-oral inspection revealed a swelling extending from tooth 32 to the ramus of the mandible (involving the retromolar area of the left side), causing displacement of teeth 34, 35 and 37. Bicortical expansion of the mandibular plates was noticed but there was no evidence of paresthesia. An orthopantomogram of the patient showed a large unilocular radiolucency extending from the left parasymphyseal area of the mandible up to the ramus; the inferior alveolar canal was displaced towards the lower border of the angle of the mandible. Root resorption of teeth 33, 34, 35, 37 was seen along with the residual roots of tooth 36.The margins of the lesion appeared well defined (Figure 2). Figure 2: Orthopantomogram showing large well defined radiolucency on the left side of the mandible Considering the clinical and radiographic evidence, a differential diagnosis of odontogenic keratocystic tumour, unilocular ameloblastoma and odontogenic myxoma was made.Incisional biopsy revealed a fibro-osseous lesion and the section of the soft tissue showed fragments of fibrocollagenous tissue with mild lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate. Sections from the bony tissue showed trabeculae of lamellar and woven bone with osteoblastic rimming and intervening spindle cell stroma.Surgical excision of the lesion was planned 2 months after biopsy. The lesion, along with spongy bone, was removed after being exposed intra-orally through the extraction site of teeth 34, 35, 36 and 37 (Figures 3, 4).Figure 3: Clinical picture showing the exposure of the lesion through the extraction sockets Figure 4: Arrow pointing towards the displaced Inferior Alveolar NerveAfter washing the cavity with normal saline, Cornoy’s solution was applied, taking special care of the inferior alveolar nerve. A Bismuth Iodine Paraffin Paste (BIPP) dressing was applied (Figure 5) and the specimen was sent for histopathological evaluation to the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology. Figure 5: Final BIPP DressingThe histopathological report concluded the presence of tissue fragments lined by stratified squamous epithelium with dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate. Other fragments from the specimen revealed loose spindle shaped cells in fibrocollagenous stroma with myxoid appearance in some areas. Moreover, nests of odontogenic epithelium were also seen in between the fibroblastic stroma (Figure 6).Figure 6: Section from the histopathological report showing nests of odontogenic epithelium in between fibroblastic stromaComplementing previous findings with conclusive histopathological results, a final diagnosis of Central Odontogenic Fibroma (COF) was established. The patient was scheduled for further follow-ups and in the third month of follow up, a significant decrease in the patients extraoral swelling was observed (Figure 7) . Figure 7: Significant decrease in extraoral swelling on third month follow upDiscussionCOF can appear to be similar to other odontogenic tumours [8]. However it is differentiated from such tumors based on its distinct clinical and histopathological features [9] ; therefore it is essential to distinguish COF from the others when attempting to diagnose it. The complete pathogenesis of COF is still not clear: whether it is a peculiar reactive process (hamartoma) or a neoplasm has not been completely established yet in the literature [2].The occurrence of COF has been reported to be more common in females than males [2] and is usually diagnosed in patients in the second or third decades of life. Regardless, cases of patients between the ages of 5 and 80 years have also been reported [10]. Originally, the lesion was believed to be exclusively confined to the mandible but observations have shown it to occur with almost equal distribution in the maxilla (54.4%) and the mandible (45.6%) [7]. In our case, the patient was a 16 year old male with the lesion occurring in the posterior mandible.The most common clinical sign is swelling of the maxilla or mandible while pain and paraesthesia are less frequently observed [3]. Moreover, COF is reported to have a slow growth rate resulting in painless cortical expansion [1-2,5-6] Consistent with these reports, our patient only complained of a painless slow-growing swelling with no associated paraesthesia.Daniels et al reported that radiographically, the smaller sized lesions often appeared unilocular whereas the larger lesions, exhibiting a more aggressive behaviour such as root resorption of adjacent teeth and expansion of the cortical plates, were often multilocular [2]. For our patient however, the lesion, although large and aggressive (causing displacement of IAN as well as displacement of adjacent teeth), appeared as a unilocular radiolucency with well-defined borders on the radiograph: a finding not consistent with Daniels’ observation.Histopathologically. COF has been categorised into two types: an epithelium-poor (simple type) and an epithelium-rich type, also referred to as complex or World Health Organisation (WHO)  type [5]. The simple type has delicate fibers interposed with substantial amounts of ground substance and is comparatively acellular. The presence of small strands of inactive epithelium is a variable feature [3] but was observed in the histopathological report of our particular case.Sections from the specimen of our patient showed fragments of tissue lined by stratified squamous epithelium with loose spindle-shaped cells in a fibrocollagenous stroma. It exhibited a myxoid appearance along with nests of odontogenic epithelium. These findings from our biopsy report allowed us to reach a definitive diagnosis of Central Odontogenic Fibroma of the complex/WHO type.It is important to include other benign tumors in the differential diagnosis of COF because odontogenic myxomas and enlarged ,contiguous dental follicles may also show relatively uniform stellate or spindle shaped cells embedded in a fibrocollagenous matrix [7]. Furthermore, the differential diagnosis of COF should include a wide range of fibrous tissue tumors, especially fibromyxoma and desmoplastic fibroma. Such distinctions are vital because these two lesions are associated with a significant recurrent rate, whereas COF is not [6]. The current recommended treatment for COF is conservative surgical enucleation followed by curettage of the cavity. The recurrence rate is not common and a good prognosis has been witnessed in most cases [1-3,5-7]. ConclusionCOF is an uncommonly occurring odontogenic tumour, which is difficult to diagnose because of its non-specific clinical signs and symptoms. It is generally confused with other tumours of odontogenic origin, leading to a hindrance in diagnosis and management. Apart from its histopathological classification into simple and complex/WHO types, there are no clear clinical or radiographic diagnostic guidelines to reach a definitive diagnosis of COF. Complete enucleation and curettage of the lesion seem to be the treatment of choice with good prognosis and little chances of recurrence has been seen so far.